# Computer Science Program < Carnegie Mellon University

## Curriculum - B.S. in Computer Science

The following requirements are for students entering Fall 2025.

#### Computer Science

<table class="sc_courselist"><tbody><tr><td colspan="2">Computer Science Core (all of the following):</td><td class="hourscol">Units</td></tr></tbody><colgroup><col class="codecol"><col class="titlecol"><col class="hourscol"></colgroup><tbody><tr class="even firstrow"><td class="codecol">07-128</td><td>First Year Immigration Course</td><td class="hourscol">3</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-122</td><td>Principles of Imperative Computation<br>(students without credit or a waiver for 15-112, Fundamentals of Programming and Computer Science, must take 15-112 before 15-122)</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">15-150</td><td>Principles of Functional Programming</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-210</td><td>Parallel and Sequential Data Structures and Algorithms</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">15-213</td><td>Introduction to Computer Systems</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-251</td><td>Great Ideas in Theoretical Computer Science</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even lastrow"><td class="codecol">15-451</td><td>Algorithm Design and Analysis</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr></tbody></table>

<table class="sc_courselist"><tbody><tr><td colspan="2">One Artificial Intelligence elective (min. 9 units). Students will be able to tackle complex, real-world problems using techniques from Artificial Intelligence, including symbolic and probabilistic reasoning, machine learning, optimization, and perception.</td><td class="hourscol"></td></tr></tbody><colgroup><col class="codecol"><col class="titlecol"><col class="hourscol"></colgroup><tbody><tr class="even firstrow"><td class="codecol">07-280</td><td>Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning I</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">10-301</td><td>Introduction to Machine Learning</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">11-411</td><td>Natural Language Processing</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">11-485</td><td>Introduction to Deep Learning</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">15-281</td><td>Artificial Intelligence: Representation and Problem Solving</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-382</td><td>Collective Intelligence<br>(Note: 15-382 is ONLY offered at Carnegie Mellon in Qatar.)</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">15-386</td><td>Neural Computation</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">16-384</td><td>Robot Kinematics and Dynamics</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even lastrow"><td class="codecol">16-385</td><td>Computer Vision</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr></tbody></table>

<table class="sc_courselist"><tbody><tr><td colspan="2">One Domains elective (min. 9 units). Students will gain expertise in fundamental principles from a larger domain of computer science not already represented by other constrained categories, currently logic and languages, systems, and artificial intelligence (which includes machine learning, language technologies, and robotics). Students will be able to apply theoretical and computational techniques from the Computer Science core to an introductory study of another major subarea of Computer Science.</td><td class="hourscol"></td></tr></tbody><colgroup><col class="codecol"><col class="titlecol"><col class="hourscol"></colgroup><tbody><tr class="even firstrow"><td class="codecol">02-251</td><td>Great Ideas in Computational Biology<br>or 02-180 &amp; 02-181</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">05-391</td><td>Designing Human Centered Software</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">11-324</td><td>Human Language for Artificial Intelligence</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-322</td><td>Introduction to Computer Music</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">15-330</td><td>Introduction to Computer Security</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-362</td><td>Computer Graphics</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">15-455</td><td>Undergraduate Complexity Theory</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="odd lastrow"><td class="codecol">17-313</td><td>Foundations of Software Engineering</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr></tbody></table>

<table class="sc_courselist"><tbody><tr><td colspan="2">One Logics/Languages elective (min. 9 units). Students will master techniques for rigorous, formal reasoning about programs or systems, rooted in their logical foundations.</td><td class="hourscol"></td></tr></tbody><colgroup><col class="codecol"><col class="titlecol"><col class="hourscol"></colgroup><tbody><tr class="even firstrow"><td class="codecol">15-311</td><td>Logic and Mechanized Reasoning</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-312</td><td>Foundations of Programming Languages</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">15-316</td><td>Software Foundations of Security and Privacy</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-317</td><td>Constructive Logic</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">15-414</td><td>Bug Catching: Automated Program Verification</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">17-355</td><td>Program Analysis</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">17-363</td><td>Programming Language Pragmatics</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd lastrow"><td class="codecol">80-413</td><td>Category Theory</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr></tbody></table>

<table class="sc_courselist"><tbody><tr><td colspan="2">One Software Systems elective (min. 12 units). Students will: 1. be able to describe how the properties of modern hardware (e.g., processor architecture, networks, storage) influence the design and implementation of software systems, such as through reasoning about concurrency and performance. 2. be able to analyze failures and / or resource limitations of physical systems and plan for their mitigation or management. 3. be able to develop abstractions based on lower-level primitives to manage the failures or other difficulties inherent in working with hardware. 4. demonstrate their learning through significant project / system implementations, requiring both course-specific knowledge as well as general system-building skills (i.e., not just programming, but also design, debugging, testing, etc.). The programming tasks together constitute a significant fraction of the course grade (e.g., 40% or more).</td><td class="hourscol"></td></tr></tbody><colgroup><col class="codecol"><col class="titlecol"><col class="hourscol"></colgroup><tbody><tr class="even firstrow"><td class="codecol">15-410</td><td>Operating System Design and Implementation</td><td class="hourscol">15</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-411</td><td>Compiler Design</td><td class="hourscol">15</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">15-418</td><td>Parallel Computer Architecture and Programming</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-440</td><td>Distributed Systems</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">15-441</td><td>Networking and the Internet</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="odd lastrow"><td class="codecol">15-445</td><td>Database Systems</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr></tbody></table>

<table class="sc_courselist"><tbody><tr><td colspan="2">Two School of Computer Science electives:</td><td class="hourscol">Units</td></tr></tbody><tbody><tr class="even firstrow"><td colspan="2"><span class="courselistcomment">These electives can be from any SCS department (Computer Science [15-], Computational Biology [02-], Human-Computer Interaction [05-], Machine Learning [10-], Language Technologies [11-], Robotics [16-], or Software &amp; Societal Systems [17-]). They must be 200-level or above and at least 9 units each, with the following exceptions:</span></td><td class="hourscol">18</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td colspan="2"><span class="courselistcomment">ADDITIONS: 1) students who take two of the major-intro mini-courses (02-180, 05-180, 07-180, or 16-180) during their first year may combine these two mini-courses together to count as one SCS elective; 2) 15-195 and 15-295 can be combined to count as one SCS elective; 3) 07-400 and 07-599 are countable as SCS electives.</span></td><td class="hourscol"></td></tr><tr class="even lastrow"><td colspan="2"><span class="courselistcomment">DELETIONS: 1) the following courses do NOT count as SCS electives: 02-201, 02-223, 02-250, 02-261, 05-200, 11-423, 15-351, 16-211, 16-223, 16-224, 16-397, 16-480, 17-200, 17-333, 17-416, 17-562; 2) some IDeATe courses and some SCS undergraduate and graduate courses might not be allowed based on course content. Always consult with a CS undergraduate advisor before registration to determine eligibility for this requirement.</span></td><td class="hourscol"></td></tr></tbody></table>

#### Mathematics

<table class="sc_courselist"><colgroup><col class="codecol"><col class="titlecol"><col class="hourscol"></colgroup><tbody><tr class="even firstrow"><td colspan="2"><span class="courselistcomment">All of the following Mathematics courses:</span></td><td class="hourscol"></td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-151</td><td>Mathematical Foundations for Computer Science<br>(if not offered, substitute 21-127 or 21-128)</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">21-120</td><td>Differential and Integral Calculus</td><td class="hourscol">10</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">21-122</td><td>Integration and Approximation</td><td class="hourscol">10</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">21-241</td><td>Matrices and Linear Transformations</td><td class="hourscol">11</td></tr><tr class="orclass even"><td class="codecol orclass">or&nbsp;21-242</td><td colspan="2">Matrix Theory</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">21-259</td><td>Calculus in Three Dimensions</td><td class="hourscol">10</td></tr><tr class="orclass odd"><td class="codecol orclass">or&nbsp;21-266</td><td colspan="2">Vector Calculus for Computer Scientists</td></tr><tr class="orclass odd"><td class="codecol orclass">or&nbsp;21-268</td><td colspan="2">Multidimensional Calculus</td></tr><tr class="orclass odd"><td class="codecol orclass">or&nbsp;21-269</td><td colspan="2">Vector Analysis</td></tr><tr class="even"><td colspan="2"><span class="courselistcomment">Plus one of the following four Probability choices:</span></td><td class="hourscol"></td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">15-259</td><td>Probability and Computing</td><td class="hourscol">12</td></tr><tr class="even"><td class="codecol">21-325</td><td>Probability</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">36-218</td><td>Probability Theory for Computer Scientists</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="even lastrow"><td class="codecol">36-225<br><span class="blockindent">&amp;&nbsp;36-226</span></td><td>Introduction to Probability Theory<br><span class="blockindent">and Introduction to Statistical Inference</span><br>(must take both courses in this sequence to satisfy requirement)</td><td class="hourscol">18</td></tr></tbody></table>

#### Technical Communication

One technical communication course, which satisfies the following learning objectives:

-   Audience: Students will be able to analyze the audience or audiences of a work: who the stakeholders are, what those stakeholders are trying to accomplish, and how persuasive communication can help students achieve their goals.
-   Written Mechanics: Students will practice developing their professional writing voice, paying attention to spelling, grammar, style, and the use of visual information.  
-   Adaptation: Students will be able to adapt expert-level information for a general audience, across textual, graphical, and oral presentation.
-   Genres/Templates: Students will practice developing information in a variety of communication contexts, connecting areas of content in their own voice, and leading the reader through a cogent sequence of ideas while working within the constraints of a particular genre or template.
-   Peer Review: Students will practice reading and revising the work of themselves and their peers.
-   Oral Presentation Mechanics: Students will prepare for the real-time act of presenting to an audience, including delivery, practice, venue setup, and managing presentation support (slides, props, etc.).
-   Oral Presentation Development: Students will explore formal and informal modes of communication, selecting, organizing and explaining information for a real-time audience, and increasing clarity with use of structure and style.
-   Group Work: Students will practice skills to help them work as a team, stay on track, and produce a group deliverable.

<table class="sc_courselist"><tbody><tr><td colspan="2">One Technical Communications course:</td><td class="hourscol">Units</td></tr></tbody><colgroup><col class="codecol"><col class="titlecol"><col class="hourscol"></colgroup><tbody><tr class="even firstrow"><td class="codecol">07-300</td><td>Research and Innovation in Computer Science</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="odd"><td class="codecol">17-200</td><td>Ethics and Policy Issues in Computing</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr><tr class="even lastrow"><td class="codecol">76-270</td><td>Writing for the Professions</td><td class="hourscol">9</td></tr></tbody></table>

#### Science and Engineering

All candidates for the bachelor's degree in Computer Science must complete a minimum of 36 units offered by the Mellon College of Science and/or the College of Engineering (CIT). These courses offer students an opportunity to explore scientific and engineering domains that can influence their effectiveness as computer scientists upon graduation.

Requirements for this component of the degree are listed under the SCS main page under General Education Requirements.

#### Humanities and Arts

All candidates for the bachelor's degree in Computer Science must complete a minimum of 63 units offered by the College of Humanities & Social Sciences and/or the College of Fine Arts. Some courses from the Tepper School of Business also qualify for this requirement. These courses offer students breadth in their education and perspectives and provide students with a better appreciation of social, artistic, cultural, political and economic issues that can influence their effectiveness as computer scientists upon graduation.

Requirements for this component of the degree are listed under the SCS main page under General Education Requirements.

#### Required Minor or Concentration

Students completing the bachelor's degree in Computer Science must complete either a minor outside of SCS or a concentration within SCS. A minor is a sequence of (typically 5-6) courses within a particular department to give students a core of a specific discipline but not an entire major of study. Refer to the sections for other CMU colleges for details about available non-SCS minors. An SCS concentration is a sequence of (typically 4-5) courses within an SCS department to give students further depth in specific areas of research important to SCS. SCS concentrations are available only to SCS students and assume that these students have a significant core knowledge in Computer Science including 15-210, 15-213 and 15-251. See the SCS Concentrations section for a list of available concentrations and their requirements. Completion of an additional major (or dual degree) also satisfies this requirement. Students should consult with their academic advisor to plan for their desired minor or concentration starting in the sophomore year.

**Double Counting**

In general, courses taken in satisfaction of the minor or additional major may also count toward any general education category in the CS major (i.e. courses outside of the Computer Science and Mathematics requirements). Double counting toward Computer Science and Mathematics courses in the CS major is strictly limited and depends on the chosen minor (or additional major). In general, students may double count at most 5 of the 12 core Computer Science requirements toward all other declared additional majors and minors. Additional majors and minors have their own double counting rules as well. Consult with a CS undergraduate advisor and an advisor from the department of the minor (or additional major) for specific restrictions on double counting.

#### Computing @ Carnegie Mellon (1 course)

The following course is required of all students to familiarize them with the campus computing environment:

<table class="sc_courselist"><colgroup><col class="codecol"><col class="titlecol"><col class="hourscol"></colgroup><tbody><tr class="even lastrow firstrow"><td class="codecol">99-101</td><td>Core@CMU</td><td class="hourscol">3</td></tr></tbody></table>

#### Free Electives

A free elective is any Carnegie Mellon course. However, a maximum of nine (9) units of Physical Education and/or Military Science (ROTC) and/or Student-Led (StuCo) courses may be used toward fulfilling graduation requirements.

#### Summary of Degree Requirements:

<table class="sc_3coltable wide sc_table" id="sc_ncoltable1"><tbody></tbody><colgroup><col class="column1"><col class="column2"><col class="column3"></colgroup><tbody><tr class="first odd undefined"><td>Area</td><td>Courses</td><td class="last">Units</td></tr><tr><td>Computer Science (core courses, constrained electives, and SCS electives)</td><td>12</td><td class="last">125</td></tr><tr class="odd undefined"><td>Mathematics</td><td>6</td><td class="last">58</td></tr><tr><td>Technical Communication</td><td>1</td><td class="last">9</td></tr><tr class="odd undefined"><td>Science/Engineering</td><td>4</td><td class="last">36</td></tr><tr><td>Humanities/Arts</td><td>7</td><td class="last">63</td></tr><tr class="odd undefined"><td>Minor or Concentration Requirement/Free electives</td><td>Varies</td><td class="last">63</td></tr><tr><td>Computing @ Carnegie Mellon</td><td>1</td><td class="last">3</td></tr><tr class="odd undefined"><td>First Year Seminar</td><td>1</td><td class="last">3</td></tr><tr class="last undefined"><td></td><td></td><td class="last">360</td></tr></tbody></table>



###### Minimum number of units required for the degree:

  
\*The flexibility in the curriculum allows many different schedules, of which the above is only one possibility. Some elective courses are offered only once per year (Fall or Spring). Constrained electives (probability, logic/languages, software systems, artificial intelligence and domains) may be taken in any order and in any semester if prerequisites are met and seats are available. Constrained electives are shown in the specific semesters in the schedule above as an example only. Students should consult with their academic advisor to determine the best elective options depending on course availability, their academic interests and their career goals.  

### Undergraduate Research Thesis

CS majors may use the SCS Honors Research Thesis as part of their degree. The SCS Honors Undergraduate Research Thesis (07-599) typically starts in the fall semester of the senior year, and spans the entire senior year. Students receive a total of 36 units of academic credit for the thesis work, 18 units per semester. Up to 18 units can be counted toward CS elective requirements (9 per semester for 2 semesters maximum).  Students interested in research may also consider using Research and Innovation in Computer Science (07-300, 9 units) as their technical communications requirement in their junior year since this course will introduce students to various research projects going on in the School of Computer Science that may lead to a senior thesis. This course leads to a subsequent Research Practicum in Computer Science (07-400, 12 units) that allows students to complete a small-scale research study or experiment and present a research poster. Students who use 15-400 to start their senior thesis can use these units toward the required 36 units.

For more information about the SCS Honors Research Thesis, refer to the SCS Honors Research Thesis section for learning objectives, application requirements and expected outcomes.

### Dual Degree in Computer Science

Students wishing to pursue a Dual Degree in Computer Science are required to apply in the same way as students wishing to transfer into the Computer Science major. Details are given in the SCS Policies section. Besides the student's primary degree requirements, a student accepted for Dual Degree in CS is required to complete at least 450 units in total and meet all requirements for the CS major including all general education requirements (humanities/arts and science/engineering). Dual degree students do not need to complete 07-128, and these students will replace 15-151 with either 21-127 or 21-128. Since the CS major requires at least a minor or concentration in another area, the student's primary major will substitute for this requirement. Note that the primary major must be completed prior to or at the same time as the dual degree in CS to satisfy the minor requirement; a dual degree in CS cannot be certified if the primary degree is not completed. Students should consult with the Assistant Dean in the CS Undergraduate Office and/or their CS academic advisor to review all requirements, once approved.

### Double-Counting Restriction

Students pursuing a Dual Degree in Computer Science must complete all requirements for the CS primary major (except 07-128 which is not required and 15-151 which will be replaced with 21-127 or 21-128). In addition, at most 5 of the 12 computer science requirements can double count with all other declared majors and minors. Students, especially from interdisciplinary majors or with multiple majors or minors, are urged to consult with the Assistant Dean or Undergraduate Program Coordinator in the CS Undergraduate Office to determine double-counting restrictions specific to their own situations.